word-formation.md, before:

# Word Formation

__<x-out>Valdaean<x-src>EXONYM</x-src></x-out>__ has two main parts of speech: *nouns* and *relations*.
Nouns are like English nouns: they name a person, place, thing, or concept.
Relations cover the uses of English adjectives, verbs, and prepositions.

This page covers the rules for forming new words in each of these categories.

## Nouns

### Compounds

Nouns can be made by compounding two nouns:

- __<x-out>alososko<x-src>[pine+forest]</x-src></x-out>__ "pine-forest" &larr; __<x-out>alos<x-src>pine</x-src></x-out>__ "pine" + __<x-out>osko<x-src>forest</x-src></x-out>__ "forest"
- __<x-out>marovantir<x-src>[town+guard]</x-src></x-out>__ "town guard" &larr; __<x-out>maro<x-src>town</x-src></x-out>__ "town" + __<x-out>vantir<x-src>guard</x-src></x-out>__ "guard"
- __<x-out>vantirgon<x-src>[guard+house]</x-src></x-out>__ "guard-house" &larr; __<x-out>vantir<x-src>guard</x-src></x-out>__ "guard" + __<x-out>gon<x-src>house</x-src></x-out>__ "house"

The main noun (which answers the question "what kind of thing is this?") always comes last,
as in English.

Nouns can also be formed by prefixing a relation to an existing noun.

- __<x-out>liryosko<x-src>[green0+forest]</x-src></x-out>__ "Greenwood" &larr; __<x-out>lirya<x-src>green0</x-src></x-out>__ "green" + __<x-out>osko<x-src>forest</x-src></x-out>__ "forest"

### Noun-forming Suffixes

Several suffixes can be added to either nouns or relations to create new nouns.

The suffix __<x-out>-(d)ir<x-src>BLANK#AGT</x-src></x-out>__ forms a word for a profession or person:

- __<x-out>keartir<x-src>gold#AGT</x-src></x-out>__ "goldsmith" &larr; __<x-out>keart<x-src>gold</x-src></x-out>__ "gold"
- __<x-out>relabir<x-src>farm#AGT</x-src></x-out>__ "farmer" &larr; __<x-out>relab<x-src>farm</x-src></x-out>__ "farm"
- __<x-out>lityadir<x-src>run0#AGT</x-src></x-out>__ "runner" &larr; __<x-out>litya<x-src>run0</x-src></x-out>__ "running"

The suffix __<x-out>-lex<x-src>BLANK#INST</x-src></x-out>__ forms the names of tools, weapons, and other artificial devices.

- __<x-out>kallex<x-src>slay1#INST</x-src></x-out>__ "sword" &larr; __<x-out>kali<x-src>slay1</x-src></x-out>__ "slaying, cutting down"
- __<x-out>warlex<x-src>lock1#INST</x-src></x-out>__ "a lock" &larr; __<x-out>waru<x-src>lock1</x-src></x-out>__ "locking"

The suffix __<x-out>-ma<x-src>BLANK#ABST</x-src></x-out>__ forms words for abstract concepts.

- __<x-out>aedrama<x-src>tall0#ABST</x-src></x-out>__ "height" &larr; __<x-out>aedra<x-src>tall0</x-src></x-out>__ "tall"
- __<x-out>vantirma<x-src>guard#ABST</x-src></x-out>__ "defense" &larr; __<x-out>vantir<x-src>guard</x-src></x-out>__ "a guard"
- __<x-out>tialma<x-src>friend#ABST</x-src></x-out>__ "friendship" &larr; __<x-out>tial<x-src>friend</x-src></x-out>__ "friend"
- __<x-out>riwaltma<x-src>king#ABST</x-src></x-out>__ "kingship, monarchy" &larr; __<x-out>riwalt<x-src>king</x-src></x-out>__ "king"

## Relations

There are also suffixes that create new relations, either from nouns or from existing relations.

The suffix __<x-out>-(a)nna<x-src>BLANK#GIVE</x-src></x-out>__ has the meaning "giving or producing". Relations formed
with this suffix are *ditransitive*: that is, they take both a direct object and an indirect
object.

- __<x-out>lexanna<x-src>word#GIVE</x-src></x-out>__ "to say (something) to (someone)" &larr; __<x-out>lex<x-src>word</x-src></x-out>__ "word"
- __<x-out>intyenna<x-src>know1#GIVE</x-src></x-out>__ "to teach (something) to (someone)" &larr; __<x-out>intye<x-src>know1</x-src></x-out>__ "knowing"

Commit message:

Swap argument order
This makes the right branch heaviest in cases where the direct object
is a whole phrase or sentence (e.g. 'teach someone *how to play chess*').

word-formation.md, after:

# Word Formation

__<x-out>Valdaean<x-src>EXONYM</x-src></x-out>__ has two main parts of speech: *nouns* and *relations*.
Nouns are like English nouns: they name a person, place, thing, or concept.
Relations cover the uses of English adjectives, verbs, and prepositions.

This page covers the rules for forming new words in each of these categories.

## Nouns

### Compounds

Nouns can be made by compounding two nouns:

- __<x-out>alososko<x-src>[pine+forest]</x-src></x-out>__ "pine-forest" &larr; __<x-out>alos<x-src>pine</x-src></x-out>__ "pine" + __<x-out>osko<x-src>forest</x-src></x-out>__ "forest"
- __<x-out>marovantir<x-src>[town+guard]</x-src></x-out>__ "town guard" &larr; __<x-out>maro<x-src>town</x-src></x-out>__ "town" + __<x-out>vantir<x-src>guard</x-src></x-out>__ "guard"
- __<x-out>vantirgon<x-src>[guard+house]</x-src></x-out>__ "guard-house" &larr; __<x-out>vantir<x-src>guard</x-src></x-out>__ "guard" + __<x-out>gon<x-src>house</x-src></x-out>__ "house"

The main noun (which answers the question "what kind of thing is this?") always comes last,
as in English.

Nouns can also be formed by prefixing a relation to an existing noun.

- __<x-out>liryosko<x-src>[green0+forest]</x-src></x-out>__ "Greenwood" &larr; __<x-out>lirya<x-src>green0</x-src></x-out>__ "green" + __<x-out>osko<x-src>forest</x-src></x-out>__ "forest"

### Noun-forming Suffixes

Several suffixes can be added to either nouns or relations to create new nouns.

The suffix __<x-out>-(d)ir<x-src>BLANK#AGT</x-src></x-out>__ forms a word for a profession or person:

- __<x-out>keartir<x-src>gold#AGT</x-src></x-out>__ "goldsmith" &larr; __<x-out>keart<x-src>gold</x-src></x-out>__ "gold"
- __<x-out>relabir<x-src>farm#AGT</x-src></x-out>__ "farmer" &larr; __<x-out>relab<x-src>farm</x-src></x-out>__ "farm"
- __<x-out>lityadir<x-src>run0#AGT</x-src></x-out>__ "runner" &larr; __<x-out>litya<x-src>run0</x-src></x-out>__ "running"

The suffix __<x-out>-lex<x-src>BLANK#INST</x-src></x-out>__ forms the names of tools, weapons, and other artificial devices.

- __<x-out>kallex<x-src>slay1#INST</x-src></x-out>__ "sword" &larr; __<x-out>kali<x-src>slay1</x-src></x-out>__ "slaying, cutting down"
- __<x-out>warlex<x-src>lock1#INST</x-src></x-out>__ "a lock" &larr; __<x-out>waru<x-src>lock1</x-src></x-out>__ "locking"

The suffix __<x-out>-ma<x-src>BLANK#ABST</x-src></x-out>__ forms words for abstract concepts.

- __<x-out>aedrama<x-src>tall0#ABST</x-src></x-out>__ "height" &larr; __<x-out>aedra<x-src>tall0</x-src></x-out>__ "tall"
- __<x-out>vantirma<x-src>guard#ABST</x-src></x-out>__ "defense" &larr; __<x-out>vantir<x-src>guard</x-src></x-out>__ "a guard"
- __<x-out>tialma<x-src>friend#ABST</x-src></x-out>__ "friendship" &larr; __<x-out>tial<x-src>friend</x-src></x-out>__ "friend"
- __<x-out>riwaltma<x-src>king#ABST</x-src></x-out>__ "kingship, monarchy" &larr; __<x-out>riwalt<x-src>king</x-src></x-out>__ "king"

## Relations

There are also suffixes that create new relations, either from nouns or from existing relations.

The suffix __<x-out>-(a)nna<x-src>BLANK#GIVE</x-src></x-out>__ has the meaning "giving or producing". Relations formed
with this suffix are *ditransitive*: that is, they take both a direct object and an indirect
object.

- __<x-out>lexanna<x-src>word#GIVE</x-src></x-out>__ "to say (to someone) (something)" &larr; __<x-out>lex<x-src>word</x-src></x-out>__ "word"
- __<x-out>intyenna<x-src>know1#GIVE</x-src></x-out>__ "to teach (someone) (something)" &larr; __<x-out>intye<x-src>know1</x-src></x-out>__ "knowing"
- __<x-out>(eat1??)anna<x-src>eat1#GIVE</x-src></x-out>__ "to feed (someone) (something)" &larr; __<x-out>(eat1??)<x-src>eat1</x-src></x-out>__ "eating"

The indirect object (the recipient of the action or the thing given) always comes first.
